content/page/about.md, before:

---
title: "About Me"
date: "2021-12-22"
author: "Ronny Trommer"
excludeFromTopNav: false
---
Work in Open Source and grew up with an Amiga 500 in the early 90s, a full-time contributor [@opennms](https://twitter.com/opennms).

#### What I'm doing today

* I work full time for [The OpenNMS Group](https://www.opennms.com) and help in various places, mainly around product management, UX and documentation
* Think a lot about how to make the world a better place with open source in the network and system monitoring domain
* Housekeeping for our development team in Germany
* First point of contact for OpenNMS customers and partners in Europe
* Beta tester
* Train people on OpenNMS
* Help structuring content for documentation
* Help maintain the Antora infrastructure and Docker container images driven by our CircleCI CI/CD environment 

### Research and Eduction

* Research assistant in the Computer Science department at University of Applied Sciences Fulda
  * [AEQUO: Enhancing the Energy Efficiency in Private Clouds Using Compute and Network Power Management Functions](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/280248032_AEQUO_Enhancing_the_Energy_Efficiency_in_Private_Clouds_Using_Compute_and_Network_Power_Management_Functions?_sg%5B0%5D=9WWfP8nUIzl3C-JD1dV_yybVEOQSV3HBs1L6qLFYNmmbocUtKap0Qxck619fvlWheM38-4cAP86l846s7Gbl-vTUNLWRDIe90tvQSEoU.XRgeXCyeSZQ81zNNyPLgbQjJywC0Tu1YXWNmxHWKW8tJ1a_meDW5zeCtHxZvFOp5_Ij3Nct_4QT9ExbnEhZz9g)
  * [Energieverbrauch von Live-Migrationen in OpenStack-basierten Private-Cloud-Umgebungen](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/331802641_Energieverbrauch_von_Live-Migrationen_in_OpenStack-basierten_Private-Cloud-Umgebungen?_sg%5B0%5D=9WWfP8nUIzl3C-JD1dV_yybVEOQSV3HBs1L6qLFYNmmbocUtKap0Qxck619fvlWheM38-4cAP86l846s7Gbl-vTUNLWRDIe90tvQSEoU.XRgeXCyeSZQ81zNNyPLgbQjJywC0Tu1YXWNmxHWKW8tJ1a_meDW5zeCtHxZvFOp5_Ij3Nct_4QT9ExbnEhZz9g)
  * [Monitoring VMware-based Virtual Infrastructures with OpenNMS](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/256481955_Monitoring_VMware-based_Virtual_Infrastructures_with_OpenNMS?_sg%5B0%5D=9WWfP8nUIzl3C-JD1dV_yybVEOQSV3HBs1L6qLFYNmmbocUtKap0Qxck619fvlWheM38-4cAP86l846s7Gbl-vTUNLWRDIe90tvQSEoU.XRgeXCyeSZQ81zNNyPLgbQjJywC0Tu1YXWNmxHWKW8tJ1a_meDW5zeCtHxZvFOp5_Ij3Nct_4QT9ExbnEhZz9g)
* Lecturer Computer Science department at University of Applied Sciences Fulda
  * Distributed systems
  * Network communication
  * Network and system monitoring and introduction to configuration management
  * Cisco Academy program Cisco IP telephony and CCNA and volunteered in lab documentation for the CCNP course program
* Wrote Diplom degree dissertation about outsourcing of network monitoring functions

### Volunteering

* Mentor [GSoC 2013](https://www.google-melange.com/archive/gsoc/2013/orgs/opennms/projects/jwhite.html): Distribute an instance of OpenNMS across different physical machines to improve availability and scalability
* Mentor [GSoC 2012](https://www.google-melange.com/archive/gsoc/2012/orgs/opennms/projects/fooker.html): Integration of Flume and ElasticSearch to analyze big log data
* Speaker about open culture and open source technology at various events, OSMC, OUCE, FOSDEM, Linux Tag
* Event coordinator and speaker OpenNMS User Conference Europe (OUCE) 2009 - 2018
* 2010: Co-founder OpenNMS Foundation Europe e.V.
* 2010: Co-founder Hacker space [Magrathea Laboratories e.V.](https://maglab.space)
* 2000: Co-founder MCL2k organizing LAN-Parties up to 828 people

### Places I've worked

* 2015 - today, full-time contributor for the OpenNMS project 
* 2011 - 2015, University of Applied Sciences Hochschule Fulda, research assistant Computer Science department
* 2010 - 2015, Open Source network monitoring with OpenNMS, Freelancer 
* 2007 - 2010, NETHINKS GmbH, provide network monitoring services with OpenNMS 
* 1998 - 2004, Drimalski & Partner GmbH, IT network infrastructure, network security, and MS Active Directory design and implementation

### Education

* 2001 - 2006, Diplom-Inform. (HS), University of Applied Sciences in Fulda, Telecommunication / Network Engineering
* 2000 - 2001, Worked as an IT system engineer, did some industry certifications around network security, network design
* 1998 - 2000, Apprenticeship IT system engineer

### Publications

* 03 / 2014: OCS Integration mit OpenNMS in [ADMIN-Magazin](https://www.admin-magazin.de/Das-Heft/2014/03/OCS-Informationen-in-die-Ueberwachung-mit-OpenNMS-integrieren/(language)/ger-DE)
* 05 / 2013: X-rayed: VMware monitoring with OpenNMS in [Linux Magazine](https://www.linux-magazine.com/Issues/2013/150/VMware-Monitoring)
* 02 / 2013: Durchleuchtet: VMware-Monitoring mit OpenNMS in [ADMIN-Magazin](https://www.admin-magazin.de/Das-Heft/2013/02)
* 07 / 2012: [Monitoring VMware-based Virtual Infrastructures with OpenNMS](https://wiki.opennms.org/documentation/CSECS2012-Pape-Trommer.pdf) 8th CSECS Boston University
* 06 / 2010: OpenNMS – Netzwerkmanagement mit feier Software [dpunkt Verlag](https://dpunkt.de/produkt/opennms/)
* 05 / 2009: Rundumkontrolle – Enterprise-Netzwerk-Management mit OpenNMS in [iX](https://shop.heise.de/katalog/rundumkontrolle)

Commit message:

Add status page, mastodon and linkfree

content/page/about.md, after:

---
title: "About Me"
date: "2021-12-22"
author: "Ronny Trommer"
excludeFromTopNav: false
---
Work in Open Source and grew up with an Amiga 500 in the early 90s, a full-time contributor [@opennms](https://twitter.com/opennms).
I maintain some web services just for fun, the current status is shown on [https://no42.betteruptime.com](https://no42.betteruptime.com).
#### What I'm doing today

* I work full time for [The OpenNMS Group](https://www.opennms.com) and help in various places, mainly around product management, UX and documentation
* Think a lot about how to make the world a better place with open source in the network and system monitoring domain
* Housekeeping for our development team in Germany
* First point of contact for OpenNMS customers and partners in Europe
* Beta tester
* Train people on OpenNMS
* Help structuring content for documentation
* Help maintain the Antora infrastructure and Docker container images driven by our CircleCI CI/CD environment 

### Research and Eduction

* Research assistant in the Computer Science department at University of Applied Sciences Fulda
  * [AEQUO: Enhancing the Energy Efficiency in Private Clouds Using Compute and Network Power Management Functions](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/280248032_AEQUO_Enhancing_the_Energy_Efficiency_in_Private_Clouds_Using_Compute_and_Network_Power_Management_Functions?_sg%5B0%5D=9WWfP8nUIzl3C-JD1dV_yybVEOQSV3HBs1L6qLFYNmmbocUtKap0Qxck619fvlWheM38-4cAP86l846s7Gbl-vTUNLWRDIe90tvQSEoU.XRgeXCyeSZQ81zNNyPLgbQjJywC0Tu1YXWNmxHWKW8tJ1a_meDW5zeCtHxZvFOp5_Ij3Nct_4QT9ExbnEhZz9g)
  * [Energieverbrauch von Live-Migrationen in OpenStack-basierten Private-Cloud-Umgebungen](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/331802641_Energieverbrauch_von_Live-Migrationen_in_OpenStack-basierten_Private-Cloud-Umgebungen?_sg%5B0%5D=9WWfP8nUIzl3C-JD1dV_yybVEOQSV3HBs1L6qLFYNmmbocUtKap0Qxck619fvlWheM38-4cAP86l846s7Gbl-vTUNLWRDIe90tvQSEoU.XRgeXCyeSZQ81zNNyPLgbQjJywC0Tu1YXWNmxHWKW8tJ1a_meDW5zeCtHxZvFOp5_Ij3Nct_4QT9ExbnEhZz9g)
  * [Monitoring VMware-based Virtual Infrastructures with OpenNMS](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/256481955_Monitoring_VMware-based_Virtual_Infrastructures_with_OpenNMS?_sg%5B0%5D=9WWfP8nUIzl3C-JD1dV_yybVEOQSV3HBs1L6qLFYNmmbocUtKap0Qxck619fvlWheM38-4cAP86l846s7Gbl-vTUNLWRDIe90tvQSEoU.XRgeXCyeSZQ81zNNyPLgbQjJywC0Tu1YXWNmxHWKW8tJ1a_meDW5zeCtHxZvFOp5_Ij3Nct_4QT9ExbnEhZz9g)
* Lecturer Computer Science department at University of Applied Sciences Fulda
  * Distributed systems
  * Network communication
  * Network and system monitoring and introduction to configuration management
  * Cisco Academy program Cisco IP telephony and CCNA and volunteered in lab documentation for the CCNP course program
* Wrote Diplom degree dissertation about outsourcing of network monitoring functions

### Volunteering

* Mentor [GSoC 2013](https://www.google-melange.com/archive/gsoc/2013/orgs/opennms/projects/jwhite.html): Distribute an instance of OpenNMS across different physical machines to improve availability and scalability
* Mentor [GSoC 2012](https://www.google-melange.com/archive/gsoc/2012/orgs/opennms/projects/fooker.html): Integration of Flume and ElasticSearch to analyze big log data
* Speaker about open culture and open source technology at various events, OSMC, OUCE, FOSDEM, Linux Tag
* Event coordinator and speaker OpenNMS User Conference Europe (OUCE) 2009 - 2018
* 2010: Co-founder OpenNMS Foundation Europe e.V.
* 2010: Co-founder Hacker space [Magrathea Laboratories e.V.](https://maglab.space)
* 2000: Co-founder MCL2k organizing LAN-Parties up to 828 people

### Places I've worked

* 2015 - today, full-time contributor for the OpenNMS project 
* 2011 - 2015, University of Applied Sciences Hochschule Fulda, research assistant Computer Science department
* 2010 - 2015, Open Source network monitoring with OpenNMS, Freelancer 
* 2007 - 2010, NETHINKS GmbH, provide network monitoring services with OpenNMS 
* 1998 - 2004, Drimalski & Partner GmbH, IT network infrastructure, network security, and MS Active Directory design and implementation

### Education

* 2001 - 2006, Diplom-Inform. (HS), University of Applied Sciences in Fulda, Telecommunication / Network Engineering
* 2000 - 2001, Worked as an IT system engineer, did some industry certifications around network security, network design
* 1998 - 2000, Apprenticeship IT system engineer

### Publications

* 03 / 2014: OCS Integration mit OpenNMS in [ADMIN-Magazin](https://www.admin-magazin.de/Das-Heft/2014/03/OCS-Informationen-in-die-Ueberwachung-mit-OpenNMS-integrieren/(language)/ger-DE)
* 05 / 2013: X-rayed: VMware monitoring with OpenNMS in [Linux Magazine](https://www.linux-magazine.com/Issues/2013/150/VMware-Monitoring)
* 02 / 2013: Durchleuchtet: VMware-Monitoring mit OpenNMS in [ADMIN-Magazin](https://www.admin-magazin.de/Das-Heft/2013/02)
* 07 / 2012: [Monitoring VMware-based Virtual Infrastructures with OpenNMS](https://wiki.opennms.org/documentation/CSECS2012-Pape-Trommer.pdf) 8th CSECS Boston University
* 06 / 2010: OpenNMS – Netzwerkmanagement mit feier Software [dpunkt Verlag](https://dpunkt.de/produkt/opennms/)
* 05 / 2009: Rundumkontrolle – Enterprise-Netzwerk-Management mit OpenNMS in [iX](https://shop.heise.de/katalog/rundumkontrolle)
