content/code/docker-java-signals-pid1/index.md, before:

---
title: "Docker, Java, Signals and Pid 1"
date: "2019-02-20"
categories: ['Container', 'Technology']
tags: ['java', 'docker', 'signals']
author: "Ronny Trommer"
noSummary: false
---

Running a Java application in a container seems to be very easy.
The devil is in the details and I want to shed some light on the PID 1 problem when you run Java applications in containers.
In a general running applications in containers should not have any state so you just don't care, but reality is different forces you to have to.

Signals are used to a running process to behave in a certain ways.
Some can be caught by a running process and give people possibilities to implement logic to shutdown the application gracefully.
A common case is to terminate a process nicely sending a `SIGTERM` to the process identified by the process id using the tool `ps`.

So when you issue the command `kill <pid>` you send a SIGTERM to a process.
When you have a process running in foreground and you hit `CTRL + C` you send the signal `SIGINT` to the process.

### Java application and signals

Let's see what this means with a very simple example.
We have a small Java application, running an infinite loop in foreground.
Here is the simple sample code.

{{< gist indigo423 53b9060d9e36c138e4a4a91f55343e05 >}}

Compile it with `javac Main.java` and run it with `java Main` and you will this here:

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ java Main
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
```

No we want to terminate it and hit `CTRL + C` and display the exit code with `echo $?`.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ java Main
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
^C%
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ echo $?
130
```

The JVM exits with error code 130 tells us it was terminated with `CTRL + C` and the JVM handled for us a `SIGINT`.

Now we try a different approach and terminate our Java app with sending a `SIGTERM`.
Start the program and open a second terminal, identify the Java process id (pid) and issue the command `kill <pid>` and show the exit code.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ java Main
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ echo $?
143
```

The JVM handled the `SIGTERM` for us and returned it with exit code `143`.

Your Linux operating system has a crowbar in your toolbox which is the `KILL` signal, it is one of the signals you can't listen for in your application.
If you try to register a handler for a `KILL` signal your JVM will throw you a runtime exception like this:

```plain
Exception in thread "main" java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Signal already used by VM or OS: SIGKILL
	at sun.misc.Signal.handle(Signal.java:166)
	at Main.handleSignal(Main.java:26)
	at Main.main(Main.java:8)
```

When you kill your application with `kill -s KILL <pid>` it will give you an exit code `137`.

### Handle the terminate signal

Now extend our little program and simulate some logic to handle the `TERM` signal and exit our program normal by returning exit code `0`.


{{< gist indigo423 cb8994b506934970d5a9784e130351cb >}}

We compile and run it again, identify the PID and kill it with `kill <pid>` and we get following result:

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ java Main
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
Signal received: TERM
Shutdown initiated
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ echo $?
0
```

### Dockerize our little app

Ok we have now a pretty good idea how it behaves on our local system.
What happens when we run the application in a Docker container image.
We use the `Main.class` as an artifact and just run it in a Java container image with a Dockerfile.

{{< gist indigo423 c76ad4d53200eff4052b039dbaa9217d >}}

The `java` binary becomes the entrypoint and we use a default argument `-h`.
By default the working directory is `/`.
We can run our application by passing the application name as the first argument and overwrite `-h`.

Let's build the image and run our application and run it.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker build -t test .
Sending build context to Docker daemon  7.168kB
Step 1/4 : FROM openjdk:11-slim
 ---> 20be262dd659
Step 2/4 : COPY Main.class /
 ---> 27dc84a91282
Step 3/4 : ENTRYPOINT ["java"]
 ---> Running in a87fdb2ed9c4
Removing intermediate container a87fdb2ed9c4
 ---> 7bc71866d0b2
Step 4/4 : CMD ["-h"]
 ---> Running in 9ff5086f1c2b
Removing intermediate container 9ff5086f1c2b
 ---> efe92a0f9f78
Successfully built efe92a0f9f78
Successfully tagged test:latest
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker run test Main
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
```

Ok now send some signals into the running container similar what we did in our local example.
Instead of `kill` we use `docker kill` and instead of the process ID we use the container id which can be identified with `docker ps`.
The exit state is persisted of stopped containers can be shown with `docker ps -a` 

Let's kill the running container and check the exit code:

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker kill <container-id>
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker ps -a
```

Now you may wonder, you see the exit state as `Exited (137) About a minute ago`.
By default `docker kill` is sending the `KILL` signal and not `TERM`.
This is one of the first notions of, applications in containers don't care about state and get killed with a crowbar by default.

Ok we run again and we send a `TERM` signal and see what happens:

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker run test Main
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
```

Now we send a `TERM` signal:

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker kill -s TERM <container-id>
```

and voila we shutdown gracefully

```bash
I'm doing some work ...
Signal received: TERM
Shutdown initiated
```

So there is `docker stop` and how does it work?
If you want to be nice to your application use `docker stop <container-id>` it will send a `TERM` signal and gives your application 10 seconds by default to terminate gracefully otherwise it get's killed with the `KILL` signal.

### Process Ids inside the running container

We run our application with containers in an isolated space.
Let's extend our little example  a little bit to see what runs inside.
We have to add the `ps` command in the Docker image.

{{< gist indigo423 e8cb5a91454305db30f70576c335b482 >}}


Now we extend our Java program with a method to list all running processes inside the container with it's process ids.


{{< gist indigo423 edaf83b61eea5670fc172d8b9dd12d09 >}}


We compile the Java class, build a new image and run the app in our container:

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ javac Main.java
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker build -t test .
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker run test Main
USER       PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY      STAT START   TIME COMMAND
root         1  0.0  0.2 5824432 35544 ?       Ssl  13:30   0:00 java Main
root        23  0.0  0.0  38384  3072 ?        R    13:30   0:00 ps aux
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ... 
```

We can see our Java application got PID 1 and it has forked the ps command which got PID 23.

### Using Scripts as Entrypoint and PID 1

Some applications are not suited for this use-case and require some logic before the can be started.
A common pattern is the entrypoint script approache.
Instead of calling the program directly we use a shell script which gives us some control to influence who the application is started.
Let's modify our container image using a very simple entry point script.

{{< gist indigo423 07aae0ad15f54ceafb2b668d0b410227 >}}

We make the `entrypoint.sh` executable and add it to our Docker image.

{{< gist indigo423 a2349b1a0739faed6b4e0942b1f97a2c >}}

The entry point script will now take care of starting our application.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ chmod +x entrypoint
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker build -t test .
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker run test
Running entry point script
USER       PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY      STAT START   TIME COMMAND
root         1  0.0  0.0   4288   724 ?        Ss   13:53   0:00 sh /entrypoint.sh
root         7  0.0  0.2 5824432 35328 ?       Sl   13:53   0:00 java Main
root        24  0.0  0.0  38384  3096 ?        R    13:53   0:00 ps aux
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
```

We can see now, the PID 1 is our entry point script.
The Java process gets forked and gets PID 7.
Let's stop it with `docker stop <container-id>`.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker stop e67b0b239f59
e67b0b239f59
```

What you will notice, your application does not get the `SIGTERM` and it takes 10 seconds until it got killed with `SIGKILL`.

The important part here, is the PID 1 in the container image has the responsibility to deal with signals.
Your entry point script doesn't whereas running the JVM as PID 1 in the example above does and we broke the behaviour of our little app.

### Exec for the win

When you are familiar with Linux bash you know the `exec` command.
Instead of forking a new process from the existing bash it replaces the shell.
We change our entry point script slightly and see what happens. 

{{< gist indigo423 742664640198093bc84e0b1609a996b1 >}}

We rebuild the container and run the image and run the `docker stop <container-id>` command.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker build -t test .
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker run test
Running entry point script
USER       PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY      STAT START   TIME COMMAND
root         1 21.0  0.2 5824432 36552 ?       Ssl  14:08   0:00 java Main
root        23  0.0  0.0  38384  3112 ?        R    14:08   0:00 ps aux
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
Signal received: TERM
Shutdown initiated
```

Now we are back in business, the entry point bash got replaced by the Java process and can deal with the signal.

### I don't want to be PID 1

In Linux PID 1 has some additional responsibilities.
There are described very nicely in the article [Docker and the PID 1 zombie reaping problem](https://blog.phusion.nl/2015/01/20/docker-and-the-pid-1-zombie-reaping-problem/).
So there are cases you don't want to be PID 1 cause you don't know how to deal with this problems.

In Docker you can run a tiny init process which deals with this things for you.
Additionally it forwards signals.
All you need is to run `--init` in your `docker run` command.
You can send a `docker stop` and your Java application can deal with the `SIGTERM` to stop gracefully.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker run --init test
Running entry point script
USER       PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY      STAT START   TIME COMMAND
root         1  0.0  0.0   1044     4 ?        Ss   14:16   0:00 /dev/init -- /entrypoint.sh
root         7  0.0  0.2 5824432 36588 ?       Sl   14:16   0:00 java Main
root        24  0.0  0.0  38384  3192 ?        R    14:16   0:00 ps aux
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
Signal received: TERM
Shutdown initiated
```

Commit message:

Improve Java and signal article

content/code/docker-java-signals-pid1/index.md, after:

---
title: "Docker, Java, Signals and Pid 1"
date: "2019-02-20"
categories: ['Container', 'Technology']
tags: ['java', 'docker', 'signals']
author: "Ronny Trommer"
noSummary: false
---

Running a Java application in a container seems to be very easy.
The devil is in the details and I want to shed some light on the PID 1 problem when you run Java applications in containers.
Theoretical, processes in containers should not have state so you just don't care, but reality is different. 

Signals are used to message running process to behave in certain ways.
A common case is to terminate a process nicely sending a `SIGTERM` to the process identified by the process id using the tool `ps`.
People can implement logic shutting down an application gracefully. 
When you issue the command `kill <pid>` you send a SIGTERM to a process.
We have other signals you can use, especially when application provide terminals.
Hitting `CTRL + C` sends `SIGINT` to the terminal process.
Some signals are quite out of time, the signal to hangup `SIGHUP` comes from terminal applications.
It is often used nowadays telling a running process to re-read configurations.

The second and much more important thing is about spawning processes.
If your application process creates child processes, disappear without waiting for the children to exit, you get zombies.
The init systems job is to take over as a parent and can clean them up.
Running an operating system your init system like systemd is pid 1 and does the job for signal handling and protecting your system from accidentally creating zombies, that can starve your systems for PIDs.
In containers, there is just your application running as a process.
You are pid 1 and your process has to deal with it.
When you have a long-running container process which spawns processes, the process cleanup mechanism is more severe.
Side note: A container is a cgroup of processes running a namespace.
The container stops and all zombies will be removed and won't bother the host systems init system.

With OpenNMS we give users some flexibility running custom scripts which can fork all kinds of processes in a non-Java language.
This article is about the signal handling with some simple examples, to illustrate the problem and how you can deal with it. 

### Java application and signals

Let's see what this means with a very simple example.
We have a small Java application, running an infinite loop in foreground.
Here is the simple sample code.

{{< gist indigo423 53b9060d9e36c138e4a4a91f55343e05 >}}

Compile it with `javac Main.java` and run it with `java Main` and you will this here:

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ java Main
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
```

No we want to terminate it and hit `CTRL + C` and display the exit code with `echo $?`.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ java Main
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
^C%
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ echo $?
130
```

The JVM exits with error code 130 tells us it was terminated with `CTRL + C` and the JVM handled for us a `SIGINT`.

Now we try a different approach and terminate our Java app with sending a `SIGTERM`.
Start the program and open a second terminal, identify the Java process id (pid) and issue the command `kill <pid>` and show the exit code.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ java Main
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ echo $?
143
```

The JVM handled the `SIGTERM` for us and returned it with exit code `143`.

Your Linux operating system has a crowbar in your toolbox which is the `KILL` signal, it is one of the signals you can't listen for in your application.
If you try to register a handler for a `KILL` signal your JVM will throw you a runtime exception like this:

```plain
Exception in thread "main" java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Signal already used by VM or OS: SIGKILL
	at sun.misc.Signal.handle(Signal.java:166)
	at Main.handleSignal(Main.java:26)
	at Main.main(Main.java:8)
```

When you kill your application with `kill -s KILL <pid>` it will give you an exit code `137`.

### Handle the terminate signal

Now extend our little program and simulate some logic to handle the `TERM` signal and exit our program normal by returning exit code `0`.


{{< gist indigo423 cb8994b506934970d5a9784e130351cb >}}

We compile and run it again, identify the PID and kill it with `kill <pid>` and we get following result:

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ java Main
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
Signal received: TERM
Shutdown initiated
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ echo $?
0
```

### Dockerize our little app

Ok we have now a pretty good idea how it behaves on our local system.
What happens when we run the application in a Docker container image.
We use the `Main.class` as an artifact and just run it in a Java container image with a Dockerfile.

{{< gist indigo423 c76ad4d53200eff4052b039dbaa9217d >}}

The `java` binary becomes the entrypoint and we use a default argument `-h`.
By default the working directory is `/`.
We can run our application by passing the application name as the first argument and overwrite `-h`.

Let's build the image and run our application and run it.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker build -t test .
Sending build context to Docker daemon  7.168kB
Step 1/4 : FROM openjdk:11-slim
 ---> 20be262dd659
Step 2/4 : COPY Main.class /
 ---> 27dc84a91282
Step 3/4 : ENTRYPOINT ["java"]
 ---> Running in a87fdb2ed9c4
Removing intermediate container a87fdb2ed9c4
 ---> 7bc71866d0b2
Step 4/4 : CMD ["-h"]
 ---> Running in 9ff5086f1c2b
Removing intermediate container 9ff5086f1c2b
 ---> efe92a0f9f78
Successfully built efe92a0f9f78
Successfully tagged test:latest
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker run test Main
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
```

Ok now send some signals into the running container similar what we did in our local example.
Instead of `kill` we use `docker kill` and instead of the process ID we use the container id which can be identified with `docker ps`.
The exit state is persisted of stopped containers can be shown with `docker ps -a` 

Let's kill the running container and check the exit code:

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker kill <container-id>
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker ps -a
```

Now you may wonder, you see the exit state as `Exited (137) About a minute ago`.
By default `docker kill` is sending the `KILL` signal and not `TERM`.
This is one of the first notions of, applications in containers don't care about state and get killed with a crowbar by default.

Ok we run again and we send a `TERM` signal and see what happens:

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker run test Main
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
```

Now we send a `TERM` signal:

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker kill -s TERM <container-id>
```

and voila we shutdown gracefully

```bash
I'm doing some work ...
Signal received: TERM
Shutdown initiated
```

So there is `docker stop` and how does it work?
If you want to be nice to your application use `docker stop <container-id>` it will send a `TERM` signal and gives your application 10 seconds by default to terminate gracefully otherwise it get's killed with the `KILL` signal.

### Process Ids inside the running container

We run our application with containers in an isolated space.
Let's extend our little example  a little bit to see what runs inside.
We have to add the `ps` command in the Docker image.

{{< gist indigo423 e8cb5a91454305db30f70576c335b482 >}}


Now we extend our Java program with a method to list all running processes inside the container with it's process ids.


{{< gist indigo423 edaf83b61eea5670fc172d8b9dd12d09 >}}


We compile the Java class, build a new image and run the app in our container:

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ javac Main.java
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker build -t test .
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker run test Main
USER       PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY      STAT START   TIME COMMAND
root         1  0.0  0.2 5824432 35544 ?       Ssl  13:30   0:00 java Main
root        23  0.0  0.0  38384  3072 ?        R    13:30   0:00 ps aux
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ... 
```

We can see our Java application got PID 1 and it has forked the ps command which got PID 23.

### Using Scripts as Entrypoint and PID 1

Some applications are not suited for this use-case and require some logic before the can be started.
A common pattern is the entrypoint script approache.
Instead of calling the program directly we use a shell script which gives us some control to influence who the application is started.
Let's modify our container image using a very simple entry point script.

{{< gist indigo423 07aae0ad15f54ceafb2b668d0b410227 >}}

We make the `entrypoint.sh` executable and add it to our Docker image.

{{< gist indigo423 a2349b1a0739faed6b4e0942b1f97a2c >}}

The entry point script will now take care of starting our application.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ chmod +x entrypoint
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker build -t test .
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker run test
Running entry point script
USER       PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY      STAT START   TIME COMMAND
root         1  0.0  0.0   4288   724 ?        Ss   13:53   0:00 sh /entrypoint.sh
root         7  0.0  0.2 5824432 35328 ?       Sl   13:53   0:00 java Main
root        24  0.0  0.0  38384  3096 ?        R    13:53   0:00 ps aux
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
```

We can see now, the PID 1 is our entry point script.
The Java process gets forked and gets PID 7.
Let's stop it with `docker stop <container-id>`.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker stop e67b0b239f59
e67b0b239f59
```

What you will notice, your application does not get the `SIGTERM` and it takes 10 seconds until it got killed with `SIGKILL`.

The important part here, is the PID 1 in the container image has the responsibility to deal with signals.
Your entry point script doesn't whereas running the JVM as PID 1 in the example above does and we broke the behaviour of our little app.

### Exec for the win

When you are familiar with Linux bash you know the `exec` command.
Instead of forking a new process from the existing bash it replaces the shell.
We change our entry point script slightly and see what happens. 

{{< gist indigo423 742664640198093bc84e0b1609a996b1 >}}

We rebuild the container and run the image and run the `docker stop <container-id>` command.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker build -t test .
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker run test
Running entry point script
USER       PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY      STAT START   TIME COMMAND
root         1 21.0  0.2 5824432 36552 ?       Ssl  14:08   0:00 java Main
root        23  0.0  0.0  38384  3112 ?        R    14:08   0:00 ps aux
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
Signal received: TERM
Shutdown initiated
```

Now we are back in business, the entry point bash got replaced by the Java process and can deal with the signal.

### I don't want to be PID 1

In Linux PID 1 has some additional responsibilities.
There are described very nicely in the article [Docker and the PID 1 zombie reaping problem](https://blog.phusion.nl/2015/01/20/docker-and-the-pid-1-zombie-reaping-problem/).
So there are cases you don't want to be PID 1 cause you don't know how to deal with this problems.

In Docker you can run a tiny init process which deals with this things for you.
Additionally it forwards signals.
All you need is to run `--init` in your `docker run` command.
You can send a `docker stop` and your Java application can deal with the `SIGTERM` to stop gracefully.

```bash
indigo@blinky ~/pid-example $ docker run --init test
Running entry point script
USER       PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY      STAT START   TIME COMMAND
root         1  0.0  0.0   1044     4 ?        Ss   14:16   0:00 /dev/init -- /entrypoint.sh
root         7  0.0  0.2 5824432 36588 ?       Sl   14:16   0:00 java Main
root        24  0.0  0.0  38384  3192 ?        R    14:16   0:00 ps aux
I'm doing some work ...
I'm doing some work ...
Signal received: TERM
Shutdown initiated
```
